---
layout: skeleton
title: Why I track my expenses
subtitle: 10 November 2021
---

# Backstory

So, Singaporean guys have to serve 2 years in the military when they hit 17.
You get paid just under S$500 per month in a city where the cheapest room for
rent goes for about S$700. It was during this time in my life that I decided to
start tracking where my money was going each month.

I came up with a pretty simple template that I've been using ever since. It's
followed me through 2 years of the aforementioned military service, then through
a period where I worked odd jobs in order to amass money for travel and
investing.

When 2020 came around, I graduated into a pretty uncertain economy where nobody
was hiring. However, I got a ton of value out of being able to project my
monthly expenses to a high degree of certainty. Years of tracking meant that I
knew what the forward burndown rate on my savings would be, over what could have
very well been 2 years of unemployment. I had the benefit of living alone at
that time, so that made calculations pretty straightforward.

# How it works

The end goal here is really _predictability_ over your monthly expenses.
Predictability liberates you to make long-term plans, like _when_ you want to
retire, _when_ you can afford big-ticket expenses, or in my case, how many more
months of runway I had left given the same lifestyle. There are many
expense-tracking apps out there, but I prefer the simplicity and flexibility of
using my own Google Sheets model.

Additionally, when you record your expenses every day, you get
_realtime feedback_ about whether you're spending too much on any given day or
week. This lets you make immediate decisions regarding how much you want to
spend in the rest of the month, if you're targeting a certain budget.

## Start with regular, daily expenses

It starts with just 3 columns, for the date, description, and dollar amount of
each and every expense. I personally like to add one new sheet per month.

![Screenshot of my expense tracker's month page](/assets/images/2021-expense-tracker-month-page.png "Screenshot of my expense tracker's month page")

If you want realtime calculations, there's no shortcut around manually adding
these rows into your spreadsheet each day. Over time, I've found that this habit
stops feeling like a chore, but it does take some getting used to at first.

## Breaking down large, irregular purchases

But what if you're making a large purchase like a laptop? That throws off your
monthly budget. Remember, while the immediately-obvious benefit of any expense
tracker is _retroactive_ visibility over your existing spend, what's actually
useful to you is leveraging this visibility to adjust your lifestyle on an
agile, day to day basis. If you know you can afford something this month, you're
free to splurge. If not, then go after the easy savings. Large purchases nullify
this `visibility --> adjustment --> predictability` workflow.

In the business world, companies use an accounting concept called amortisation
to break down large costs. The idea is that you can split a large purchase into
smaller chunks in order to fairly represent the "cost" of something over the
long-term timespan you're using it through.

In my case, I'm not really "amortising" my purchases in the business sense of
the word, but I do want to split up the large ones so that I can get a sense of
how much I'm paying for each week of utility. In the example below, I've split
up some annual recurring expenses into their per-week equivalents.

![Screenshot of my expense tracker's amortisation page](/assets/images/2021-expense-tracker-amortised-page.png "Screenshot of my expense tracker's amortisation page")

## Add them up

What I like to do is to create a reporting sheet where I sum up every week's
regular expenses with the amortised expenses, so I can see at one glance how
much I've spent so far in the `Total` column, as well as how much I can spend
for the rest of the week in the `Left` column, which is calculated based on an
arbitrary monthly budget I set in the cell with blue font.

![Screenshot of my expense tracker's report page](/assets/images/2021-expense-tracker-report-page.png "Screenshot of my expense tracker's report page")

# Conclusion

Is this useful or just kinda overkill? Well, as long as spend predictability
enables me to make long-term plans, I don't see myself quitting this
expense-tracking habit anytime soon ðŸ˜¬
